[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today I'm
going to talk about a big Gulf that exists between
the way mathematics and mathematicians treat
arithmetical problems and the way they treat
geometrical problems when it comes to arithmetical
problems we mostly all acknowledge that there are
correct answers and that it's important to get
those correct answers and we don't allow any kind
of approximation in general so if I ask you what 6
* 7 is I expect to hear 42 not 40 or approximately
45 however in Geometry the situation currently
with our current technology is completely
different and it's because we rely on angles last
time I made the following strong claim let's call
it wildberger claim that using angles it becomes
almost impossible to solve concrete geometrical
problems correctly in other words I claim that
even professional mathematicians teaching at
universities near you cannot solve the majority
of natural geometrical problems correctly they can
solve these things approximately but when it comes
to actual completely correct answers they fall
down it's not not because they're not smart enough
it's because the technology that they're using the
conceptual framework is not the right one so let's
talk about this this through this example that I
gave last time we had a triangle ABC with sides
5 7 and 4 and I said all right let's construct an
angle bis sector so these two angles are equal
creating a point D on this side and then let's
go an angle 45° from D to a point e on the other
side what is the distance between e and C that's
the challenge that's a rather random triangle and
somewhat arbitrary problem you can imagine making
thousands of other problems that are variance like
this or something in the same direction now if you
use the standard technology that people learn in
high school and you work with angles you may have
obtained an answer like this that the distance
between e and C is equal to 4 9 35053 02 dot dot
dot and depending on how your calculator is set up
or depending on what degree of accuracy you were
using you may have gotten fewer or more digits but
certainly you will have gotten to a certain point
and then trailed off with the end with three dots
so let's mark this let's give it a Mark I like to
Mark mathematics out of one I like to give a mark
of one if it's correct and a mark of zero if it's
not correct very black and white okay so what
Mark am I going to give this I'm sorry but I'm
going to give you zero out of one because in my
view this is not a correct answer why is it not
correct well I think you should all know by now
it's because of these three dots what do these
three dots exactly mean there's an infinite amount
of additional information that's off the page that
this answer does not address so it's part of the
answer or it's an approximation to the answer I
remind you that if you want approximate answers to
geometrical questions you can always just say the
answer is zero so approximately any measurement
is approximately zero are we going to give part
marks to that kind of answer no we're not and
we're not going to give part marks to this either
so what is the actual correct answer well here's
the correct answer that I worked out the distance
between e and C is this number right here it's the
square root of here's a fraction with numerator
9722 61136 / 16916 769 and then we subtract
22872 4160 ID 1691 16769 all of that times otk
6 that answer gets one out of one because it's
correct complete correct and here is some more
additional information about that picture this
additional information is in the framework of
rational trigonometry no angles no distances
just spreads and quadran is so it's turns out
to be rather interesting that these two spreads
are 3 fifths each 24 over 49 that's the spread
there spread here is 384 over 1225 45 de becomes
a spread of a half there some other values spread
there the spread s given by this the spread
T here given by this this quadrant which is a
square of distance that quadrant is 640 over
81 this quadrant here is given by this more
complicated expression and more generally I
could compute pretty well anything you want
about such a a picture and all of these numbers
that you see here are EX exactly precise there
are no approximations whatsoever so if we were
dealing with a more complicated situation where
this was just stage one of four five or 10
stages we would carry these exact answers
along to generate further exact answers
and never are we going to compromise and
replace an exact expression like this with
a decimal approximation because that would
lose our correctness okay so this is all in the
framework of rational trigonometry if you want to
know a little bit more about this fascinating
new development this entire series of YouTube
videos under wild trig which I posted and I
strongly suggest that you learn some rational
trigonometry the disadvantage of angles doesn't
just extend to solving particular specialized
problems like this it also extends to even
understanding really simple basic configurations
that are accessible or should be accessible to
public school and high school students let's have
a look at an example of what I'm talking about
in this series we've been working a lot with
the grid plane so here's a very simple example
coming from the grid plane we imagine each one
of these lines is separated by say one unit and
I've chosen three points a b and c forming an
integral triangle in this grid plane this this
is a potentially natural and important object
to study and to analyze completely unfortunately
with angles it is very hard and cumbersome to pin
down what's going on in a triangle like this
the sides are < TK 29 < TK 20 andun 45 if we
measure in distance if we measure in angles
and radians these angles alpha beta and gamma
have the following approximate values in fact
it turns out to to uh be highly non-trivial to
calculate these things you have to know some
uh some trigonometry and you need probably a
calculator to uh calculate these things I suspect
that even a professional mathematician to get
this amount of information on this page here with
this initial data without a calculator would take
a a week of work paper and pencil a professional
mathematician I think under a week of work they
would struggle to come up with these answers
if you're a professional mathematician you can
prove me wrong okay in the standard framework
of things one of the advantages in working with
angles is that the three angles of the triangles
sum up to Pi so in other words if we take these
three approximate values of course we don't
know what these taals are and we add them up
then Alpha plus beta plus gamma is equal to this
particular number which we've all seen many times
3.1415926535 dot dot dot which is the number
pi well we say it's the number Pi but we'd say
that without actually saying what that pattern is
that's represented by those three dots so we're
of course cheating as we usually do and this is
usually considered to be a a great advantage in
the angle system that angles add up linearly to
a pi I think it's quite dubious whether this is
such an advantage you can see the complexity here
this is far beyond what a public schools or even
high school student can really effectively
understand completely on the other hand with
rational trigonometry the three spreads at these
vertices can be calculated in a very Elementary
way it takes a high school student 10 minutes
to calculate these things there's a spread at
a there's a spread at B there's a spread at C
and they are rational numbers reflecting the
fact that we're working in a purely rational
situation which I remind you once again is
the most natural and simple framework for doing
geometry and arithmetic next time we're going to
talk about another aspect of the difficulty
with angles having to do with the circular
transcendental functions I hope you'll join me for
that. I'm Norman Wildberger, thanks for [Music]
listening